Princeton, in the summer, smelled of nothing, and although Ifemelu liked the tranquil greenness ofthe many trees, the clean streets and stately homes, the delicately overpriced shops, and the quiet,abiding air of earned grace, it was this, the lack of a smell, that most appealed to her, perhapsbecause the other American cities she knew well had all smelled distinctly. Philadelphia had themusty scent of history. New Haven smelled of neglect. Baltimore smelled of brine, and Brooklyn ofsun-warmed garbage. But Princeton had no smell. She liked taking deep breaths here. She likedwatching the locals who drove with pointed courtesy and parked their latest model cars outside theorganic grocery store on Nassau Street or outside the sushi restaurants or outside the ice creamshop that had fifty different flavors including red pepper or outside the post office where effusive staffbounded out to greet them at the entrance. She liked the campus, grave with knowledge, the Gothicbuildings with their vine-laced walls, and the way everything transformed, in the half-light of night,into a ghostly scene. She liked, most of all, that in this place of affluent ease, she could pretend to besomeone else, someone specially admitted into a hallowed American club, someone adorned withcertainty.But she did not like that she had to go to Trenton to braid her hair. It was unreasonable to expect abraiding salon in Princeton
—
the few black locals she had seen were so light-skinned and lank-haired she could not imagine them wearing braids
—
and yet as she waited at Princeton Junctionstation for the train, on an afternoon ablaze with heat, she wondered why there was no place whereshe could braid her hair. The chocolate bar in her handbag had melted. A few other people werewaiting on the platform, all of them white and lean, in short, flimsy clothes. The man standing closestto her was eating an ice cream cone; she had always found it a little irresponsible, the eating of icecream cones by grown-up American men, especially the eating of ice cream cones by grown-up American men in public. He tur 
ned to her and said, “About time,” when the train finally creaked in,
with the familiarity strangers adopt with each other after sharing in the disappointment of a publicservice. She smiled at him. The graying hair on the back of his head was swept forward, a comicalarrangement to disguise his bald spot. He had to be an academic, but not in the humanities or hewould be more self-
conscious. A firm science like chemistry, maybe. Before, she would have said, “Iknow,” that peculiar American expression that
professed agreement rather than knowledge, andthen she would have started a conversation with him, to see if he would say something she coulduse in her blog. People were flattered to be asked about themselves and if she said nothing afterthey spoke, it made them say more. They were conditioned to fill silences. If they asked what she
did, she would say vaguely, “I write a lifestyle blog,” because saying “I write an anonymous blog
called
Raceteenth or Various Observations About American Blacks (Those Formerly Known as Negroes) by a Non-American Black 
” would make them uncomfortable. She had said it, though, a few
times. Once to a dreadlocked white man who sat next to her on the train, his hair like old twine ropesthat ended in a blond fuzz, his tattered shirt worn with enough piety to convince her that he was a
social warrior and might make a good guest blogger. “Race is totally overhyped these days, blackpeople need to get over themselves, it’s all about class now, the haves an
d the have-
nots,” he toldher evenly, and she used it as the opening sentence of a post titled “Not All Dreadlocked White American Guys Are Down.” Then there was the man from Ohio, who was squeezed next to her on a
flight. A middle manager, she was sure, from his boxy suit and contrast collar. He wanted to know
what she meant by “lifestyle blog,” and she told him, expecting him to become reserved, or to endthe conversation by saying something defensively bland like “The only race that matters is the
human
race.” But he said, “Ever write about adoption? Nobody wants black babies in this country,and I don’t mean biracial, I mean black. Even the black families don’t want them.”
 He told her that he and his wife had adopted a black child and their neighbors looked at them as
though they had chosen to become martyrs for a dubious cause. Her blog post about him, “Badly
-
Dressed White Middle Managers from Ohio Are Not Always What You Think,” had received the
highest number of comments for that month. She still wondered if he had read it. She hoped so.Often, she would sit in cafés, or airports, or train stations, watching strangers, imagining their lives,and wondering which of them were likely to have read her blog. Now her ex-blog. She had writtenthe final post only days ago, trailed by two hundred and seventy-four comments so far. All thosereaders, growing month by month, linking and cross-posting, knowing so much more than she did;they had always frightened and exhilarated her. SapphicDerrida, one of the most frequent posters,
wrote: I’m a bit surprised by how personally I am taking this. Good luck as you pursue the unnamed“life change” but please come back to the blogosphere soon. You’ve used your irreverent, hectoring,
funny and thought-provoking voice to create a space for real conversations about an important
subject. Readers like SapphicDerrida, who reeled off statistics and used words like “reify” in their
comments, made Ifemelu nervous, eager to be fresh and to impress, so that she began, over time,to
feel like a vulture hacking into the carcasses of people’s stories for something she could use.
Sometimes making fragile links to race. Sometimes not believing herself. The more she wrote, theless sure she became. Each post scraped off yet one more scale of self until she felt naked andfalse.The ice-cream-eating man sat beside her on the train and, to discourage conversation, she staredfixedly at a brown stain near her feet, a spilled frozen Frappuccino, until they arrived at Trenton. The platform was crowded with black people, many of them fat, in short, flimsy clothes. It still startled her,what a difference a few minutes of train travel made. During her first year in America, when she tookNew Jersey Transit to Penn Station and then the subway to visit Aunty Uju in Flatlands, she wasstruck by how mostly slim white people got off at the stops in Manhattan and, as the train went
further into Brooklyn, the people left were mostly black and fat. She had not thought of them as “fat,”
though. She had tho
ught of them as “big,” because one of the first things her friend Ginika told herwas that “fat” in America was a bad word, heaving with moral judgment like “stupid” or “bastard,” andnot a mere description like “short” or “tall.” So she had banished “fat”
 
from her vocabulary. But “fat”
came back to her last winter, after almost thirteen years, when a man in line behind her at the
supermarket muttered, “Fat people don’t need to be eating that shit,” as she paid for her giant bag of
Tostitos. She glanced at him, surprised, mildly offended, and thought it a perfect blog post, how this
stranger had decided she was fat. She would file the post under the tag “race, gender and bodysize.” But back home, as she stood and faced the mirror’s truth, she realized that
she had ignored,for too long, the new tightness of her clothes, the rubbing together of her inner thighs, the softer,rounder parts of her that shook when she moved. She was fat.
She said the word “fat” slowly, funneling it back and forward, and thought
 about all the other thingsshe had learned not to say aloud in America. She was fat. She was not curvy or big-boned; she wasfat, it was the only word that felt true. And she had ignored, too, the cement in her soul. Her blog wasdoing well, with thousands of unique visitors each month, and she was earning good speaking fees,and she had a fellowship at Princeton and a relationship with Blaine
—“You are the absolute love ofmy life,” he’d written in her last birthday card—
and yet there was cement in her soul. It had beenthere for a while, an early morning disease of fatigue, a bleakness and borderlessness. It broughtwith it amorphous longings, shapeless desires, brief imaginary glints of other lives she could beliving, that over the months melded into a piercing homesickness. She scoured Nigerian websites,Nigerian profiles on Facebook, Nigerian blogs, and each click brought yet another story of a youngperson who had recently moved back home, clothed in American or British degrees, to start aninvestment company, a music production business, a fashion label, a magazine, a fast-foodfranchise. She looked at photographs of these men and women and felt the dull ache of loss, asthough they had prised open her hand and taken something of hers. They were living her life.Nigeria became where she was supposed to be, the only place she could sink her roots in withoutthe constant urge to tug them out and shake off the soil. And, of course, there was also Obinze. Herfirst love, her first lover, the only person with whom she had never felt the need to explain herself. Hewas now a husband and father, and they had not been in touch in years, yet she could not pretend that he was not a part of her homesickness, or that she did not often think of him, sifting throughtheir past, looking for portents of what she could not name.The rude stranger in the supermarket
—
who knew what problems he was wrestling with, haggardand thin-lipped as he was
—
had intended to offend her but had instead prodded her awake.She began to plan and to dream, to apply for jobs in Lagos. She did not tell Blaine at first, becauseshe wanted to finish her fellowship at Princeton, and then after her fellowship ended, she did not tellhim because she wanted to give herself time to be sure. But as the weeks passed, she knew she
would never be sure. So she told him that she was moving back home, and she added, “I have to,”
knowing he would hear in her words the sound of an ending.
“Why?” Blaine asked, almost automatically, stunned by her announcement
. There they were, in hisliving room in New Haven, awash in soft jazz and daylight, and she looked at him, her good,bewildered man, and felt the day take on a sad, epic quality. They had lived together for three years,three years free of crease, like a smoothly ironed sheet, until their only fight, months ago, when
Blaine’s eyes froze with blame and he refused to speak to her. But they had survived that fight,
mostly because of Barack Obama, bonding anew over their shared passion. On election night,befo
re Blaine kissed her, his face wet with tears, he held her tightly as though Obama’s victory was
also their personal victory. And now here she was telling him it was over.
“Why?” he asked. He taught ideas of nuance and complexity in his classes and yet he
was askingher for a single reason, the cause. But she had not had a bold epiphany and there was no cause; itwas simply that layer after layer of discontent had settled in her, and formed a mass that nowpropelled her. She did not tell him this, because it would hurt him to know she had felt that way for awhile, that her relationship with him was like being content in a house but always sitting by thewindow and looking out.
“Take the plant,” he said to her, on the last day she saw him, when she was pac
king the clothes shekept in his apartment. He looked defeated, standing slump-shouldered in the kitchen. It was hishouseplant, hopeful green leaves rising from three bamboo stems, and when she took it, a suddencrushing loneliness lanced through her and stayed with her for weeks. Sometimes, she still felt it.How was it possible to miss something you no longer wanted? Blaine needed what she was unableto give and she needed what he was unable to give, and she grieved this, the loss of what couldhave been.


